Bit (Binary digit)
Either of the digits 0 or 1 used in the binary number system
Nibble
Consists of 4 bits or half a byte
Number of bits in a byte
8
Number of bytes in a kilobyte
1024
Binary 1
1
Binary 4
100
Binary 6
110
Binary 9
1001
Boolean
a subset of algebra used for creating true/false statements
AND gate
a Boolean operator which gives the value one if and only if all the operands are one, and otherwise has a value of zero
OR gate
a logical operation which gives the value one if at least one operand has the value one, and otherwise gives a value of zero.
NOT gate
a Boolean operator with only one variable that has the value one when the variable is zero and vice versa.
Truth table
Show the result of combining any two expression boolean expressions using the AND operator and the OR operator (or the NOT operator).
Flashing the firmware
updating/overwriting the firmware or data on ROM
BIOS
basic input output system, is stored on ROM so that the computer has boot-up instructions when the power is turned on.
Hexadecimal
relating to or using a system of numerical notation that has 16 rather than 10 as its base.
Eye-typer
A camera tracks the movement of a person’s eye and can detect which key they are looking at. They can then blink to select the key.
Speech synthesis
For users who are unable to communicate verbally, this will take text they type on the computer and then relay those words through speakers, using a variety of synthesised voices.
Braille keyboard
Used by people with poor or no sight in order to type text into a computer. The keys are embossed with the standard Braille character patterns.
Foot mouse
Replicates the functions of a normal mouse but made for people with limited use of hand movement. A trackball and buttons are designed to be easily operated by a foot.
Joystick
Requires a lot less physical movement than a mouse and can be used to control a pointer on the screen in the same way.
Puff-suck switch
Used by people who have severely limited physical mobility. With this devices the user interacts with the computer by blowing or sucking on a small tube.
Voice Recognition
For users who cannot easily use a keyboard. Spoken commands are translated by specialist software into text and sent to the computer.